what you are looking at is an akrana
plan or ground effect vehicle
autonomously navigating to various
preset waypoints on a map
using the open source autopilot software
known as artypilot
this is the story of how this project
got here
i was watching a video by the youtuber
rc test flight about a long-range
autonomous boat drone and it struck me
as a great idea to do an echronoplan
version
everyone in the comments section seemed
to be having the same thought
rather than run with the idea myself i
reached out to rc test flight to see if
he wanted to do a joint project
it turned out that custom code for
arduplane was already being worked on on
his end for such a purpose and this
collaboration was born
i was also curious to see if custom code
in arduplane was necessary
or if rd plane could be made to work
well enough as is
so what is ground effect check out these
pelicans flying at various heights above
the water
you will notice the lower pelican which
is closer to the water has a smaller
flattened out wingtip vortex while the
upper pelican
which is further from the water has a
much larger stronger wingtip vortex
the stronger vortex increases drag and
thus increases the energy required to
fly
this is a characteristic of wingspan
dominated ground effect
the other extreme is cord dominated
ground effect where a short stubby wing
creates a ram effect and
increases the lift more so than
decreasing drag
notable flights in ground effect include
the wright brothers first powered flight
and the one and only flight of the
spruce goose
many concepts abound to utilize ground
effect and these are a few
given the many considerations available
what went into choosing this
is the final configuration while the air
fish 8 is probably my favorite wing and
ground effect craft
those wings are a real challenge to cut
using a hot wire cutter which is my
primary tool for prototyping
i still wanted a cord dominated vehicle
though with some wing extensions for
roll control
and of course we need a massive
horizontal stabilizer to help us out as
we move
in and out of ground effect test vehicle
number one was terrible
as the v-tail design had no longitudinal
stability
test vehicle 2 with an additional
central rudder
was almost as bad
test vehicle number three tracked quite
well although it would need to be
modified with a large elevator to
compensate for large center of pressure
changes as it moved in and out of ground
effect
as well as winglets for roll control
also when it's out of ground effect
the design was working quite well now
this will be the first test of the
powered winging ground effect
uh vehicle um no steering
no ailerons no rudder so just a little
bit of power
and it'll probably just spin in circles
but let's give it a shot
[Music]
for the most part the plane did just go
in circles
but every now and then you get in a good
run
usually cut short by the only object in
sight
i needed to try something else
so with the motors in the front it
understandably tracks quite a bit better
overcomes the the resistance that you
get on these pontoons here
so since i want this to be as autonomous
as possible
as stable as possible by itself
i didn't want to put the motors on the
front because of durability they're more
protected in the back but
probably just gonna have to go with
motors in the front so
i'll do a run here run or two just to
show you
um that it tracks a lot better
and then probably going to size up after
this
not a lot left to learn on this guy i
don't think
now that the basic configuration was
selected it was time to get specific in
xflr5
after many iterations this was the final
design
xflr5 is not great for modeling
fuselages
and other bodies so i left off the
pontoons and the fuselage
however this allows you to get really
really close
without all those features xflr5 also
has an amazing feature where it allows
you to calculate the difference between
the aerodynamics in-ground effect and
out-of-ground effect
so that you don't have any surprises as
you move between the two elements which
is a big deal on winging ground effect
aircraft
depending on the design ground effect
vehicles can have dramatic changes in
the center of pressure depending on
height above the surface they are moving
over
as you can see here the vehicle
essentially becomes instantaneously tail
heavy as the nose rises
leading to a spectacular backflip
the first thing i really needed to
figure out before diving into this build
was pontoon
shape and size using the amazing
principles
laid out in this book i was able to make
some pontoons that got me really close
right from the beginning
at 10 pounds simulated weight i was
quite pleased with how the craft sat in
the water
i did end up carving a little bit more
off the back than the front
to get the tail to sit a little bit
deeper in the water and increase the
angle of attack on the wing
but other than that it was good right
off the bat
so i was on the interwebs learning how
to waterproof the electronics for this
project
and we will be using corrosion xhd on
the servos
and on the battery and then on the escs
and the autopilot i will be using
a silicon conformal coating and that is
the next step
now that i knew what i was building it
was time to start building
here's a little montage to get you
through the next 30 seconds of your life
if you are interested in the general
construction techniques of this airplane
check out this video linked on the upper
right
after installing the electronics and
posing for some glamour shots there was
really nothing left to do
but fly this thing
[Music]
you may remember me saying i would put
the motors in the front while clearly
they ended up in the back of the craft
after much deliberation and taking the
air fish eight and other examples into
consideration i decided to take a chance
on the rear motors despite my experience
with the free flight model
thanks to the yaw dampening function in
arduplane takeoff is a complete
non-event
in unstabilized modes the takeoff can
sometimes go a little sideways though
what followed was a few mornings of
testing before the wind would get going
i first played around with the center of
gravity to find the most reared position
i could get away with
out of ground effect as this would help
the craft be as efficient as possible
while in ground effect i also needed to
check out the stability modes for
general flight characteristics
and they were good enough for me without
any adjustment in arduplane
i found that with careful entry into
ground effect and with fine throttle
adjustment the akrano plan would
maintain its position in ground effect
completely hands off
next it was time to add an airspeed
sensor for throttle control in auto
modes
while testing one day a kind stranger
came out and read off air speeds from
telemetry and mission planner as i
manually maintained ground effect with
throttle
when i went back and looked at the log
files later indeed he had nailed it
thank you kind stranger finally the last
test was here
after securing a boat and a location for
the test the mission was planned
on the computer with gentle turns to
avoid a wing strike
which turned out not to be an issue i
found after a few test passes that the
air speed needed to be kept higher in
autonomous modes than i had needed in
stability mode to prevent an
unintended landing and then it was time
ground effect was entered and i switched
into a waypoint mission
set for one foot off the water
[Music]
in my opinion the mission was a total
success partially
the acronym plan never touched the water
and spent about half its time in ground
effect
it also never rose more than its
wingspan of six feet above the water
and the big one which was still having
an intact craft to hand off to rc test
flight to continue the project
i cannot wait to see a tighter altitude
control implemented
among other things to see where this
project goes
head over to rc test flight's channel
as i bring the ground effect vehicle and
this episode in for a landing please
consider subscribing if you think i
earned it
it really helped also i usually name all
my projects but couldn't come up with
anything this time
drop a suggestion in the comments below
if you think of anything clever and
let's see if something sticks
maybe rc test flight will roll with one
of them